
SNS ADARA SYSTEM

This repository contains the software for the next-generation Data
Aquisition System (DAS) at the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) at
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) -- "ADARA".

ADARA stands for "Accelerating Data Acquisition, Reduction, and
Analysis" and is a collaborative project between the SNS and ORNL's
Computing and Computational Sciences Directorate (CCSD) to develop
"next-generation" software and hardware components for SNS data
acquisition. The goal of ADARA is to provide real time (streaming) data
acquisition and data analysis system(s) for SNS that will ultimately
provide the researchers using the SNS beam lines with effectively
instant access to their reduced experimental data both during, and
after, data collection.

The main ADARA software infrastructure contains the following key
software components:

   * "Stream Management Service (SMS)" for collecting and collating
   neutron pulse and event data from detector system preprocessors, as
   well as Process Variables (PVs) from the beamline Slow Controls and
   Sample Environment subsystems, and producing a hybrid streaming
   network protocol that combines these data along with run-time
   experiment/run meta-data;

   * "Streaming Translation Client (STC)" receives the live data
   stream from the SMS and applies it to produce live NeXus Event
   files, available immediately upon completion of a given
   experimental run, for reduction and analysis;

   * ""PVStreamer"" service collects the values and status of
   Slow Controls and Sample Environment Process Variables
   (PVs) and delivers them to the SMS for inclusion in the
   hybrid network protocol stream;

   * "Post-Processing and Reduction" service is notified
   when the STC completes the generation of the NeXus
   Event file, and proceeds to apply pre-defined data
   post-processing and reduction operations, customizable
   on a per-beamline basis, and then archives and catalogs
   the resulting data files.

There is also an ADARA Test Harness for building and testing various
ADARA software components, using historical SNS experiment data. This
Test Harness can be used for Manual Testing as well as regular
Integration Testing via the Jenkins Test and Build system.

Copyright (c) 2015, UT-Battelle LLC
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
are met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

3. Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
this software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS
IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR
CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL,
EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR
PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING
NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS
SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

